---
layout: post
title: "How I've got my first client at upwork"
comments: true
categories: en freelance
---

![]({{ site.url }}/images/first-upwork-mountain.jpg)

Recently, I've decided that I want to become a freelancer. For a lot of days I
was holding myself back and doing nothing in that direction. You should agree
that it seems scary to try and go into freelancing without at least a few years
of prior experience at regular work (at least it was for me).

You cannot get something by doing nothing, so after getting a lot of inspiration
from various online sources, I finally decided that it was time to start moving
in this direction at least slowly. With this thing in mind I registered at
Upwork. In the beginning I had no faith that I will lend a job, I didn't even
have faith that someone would respond to my proposals. I was wrong in my believes.

I didn't start writing proposals from the first day I registered. I decided that
I have to have something to show before someone at least will consider hiring
me. Without prior job experience and literally nothing to show, I considered I
have poor chances.

So, the first thing I decided to do was to build a portfolio and to showcase my
skills. On Upwork you can pass tests to prove that you're into the topic. I
passed the tests, but wasn't satisfied with the results. To retry a test you
need to wait a month. For a month a tried to polish what I knew and to acquire
new knowledge. Then I retook the test. Do you know how much I increased my
previous results? I increased by 0.0! So literally in a month I didn't get
closer to becoming a freelancer from my perspective. Of course I learned a lot
of stuff, but it wasn't the goal I was going after.

Building a skill set and increasing my test results by reading books etc. didn't
turned out good. Hence, I decided to devote most of my time to building a
portfolio. The first obstacle I came across was: what should I build? It should
have been something awesome and cool, that perspective client would look at and
say "Wow!" and I will be highly motivated to do it. I ended up doing regular
project, but the one that could possibly bring some value into the world. I
think the best thing you can do is to build something for your friend and
relative and that's what I did.

Nearly at the same time, I have got into coala open source community. I thought
that it may also increase my chances of lending a job in the future. Before
contributing to open source at least in some way I also hesitated a lot, so
that's probably a habit I should break. Contributing to open source turned out
to be very fun and I learned a lot of things.

Only after few months of doing something partially related to becoming a
freelancer, I at last completed my profile at Upwork. I think it looked pretty
well, but the only thing that could make someone want to hire me, was my
overview:

```
I'm not developing software that works. I'm developing software that will be
easy to extent, change and maintain.
I have passion for software developing and I'm committed to developing
proficiency in all aspects of it.
I participate in open source projects. Currently I'm one of maintainers of the
coala project. Also, I'll be mentoring student with them during Goggle Summer of
Code.
I developed applications with Django. I have some knowledge in developing
responsive, clear web designs with maximal separation of semantic and
representation.
I'm a quick learner and responsible person with positive attitude.
```

I know it's somewhat poor and I should change it, but at the time, it's enough.

I was tired of doing actions that are only partially related, so I started to
send out proposals. I tried to pick only those projects that I was sure, I will
be able to do and I was interested in doing. And while writing cover letters I
tried to express that I really did read the project description, that I can do
the work and that I'm motivated and interested in it. Also, as I had no prior
experience, I tried to put lower prices, though I'm not sure this is a good
thing to do.

I was surprised and encouraged that people interviewed me. That meant that I was
on the right track. After few weeks of sending out proposals, I've got my first
job. The contract was for 225$ and I completed it in 4 days of work, 3 of which
I worked really a lot. My work was rewarded and I got 5 stars review, 50$ bonus
and the client proposed a new project right away. Maybe, I just got lucky, but
now I believe more in my ability to become a professional freelancer and the
only big error I made in my journey from wanting to doing is hesitating for such
a long time! So, if you want something to do, but think that you may be not good
enough, you'll never know until you try, so just go for it! As for me, the future
would tell if I'll be successful in freelancing.
